1 4   J U N E   2 0 2 3

---

We are at an intersection in our time.

Of human ‘intellectual’ DNA mutating into machine ‘intellectual’ DNA.
This is the simplest way to think of the state of technology [AI] in 2023.

This definition is not fixed. It will continue to evolve.
This idea is not new.
It has existed since we produced and reproduced ‘objects’.
This idea was democratised, and modernised, from the industrial revolution - the machine age.
This idea will mutate into more machine than human.
This intelligent, thinking, talking, creating machine will be part of our daily life.


AI is not just a new technology that will assist in humanities activities. If we think of social media as the last technological evolution that enabled the sharing of personal narratives of information across the world - AI is a technology that will allow us to generate new information. New versions of narratives. New versions of our self, mutating versions of ourselves - in a cyber space that will make it difficult to distinguish human from machine.

It is trained on our data DNA. To look like us, sound like us, think like us.
It will move faster than us. It’s creation of ‘content’ will surpass us.
It will be the definition of a ‘singular’ human-machine mind.
It will be the closest we have come to reaching ‘singularity’.

This embodiment of machine thinking will take form of content generation before the existence of human-like machines in our everyday. The future is already here - from hyper personalised recommendation systems, based on your profile identity - to AI platforms that model human-like thinking to generate new ideas.
Information technology, in the form of ‘Big Tech’, has surpassed countries as the new era of global super power in our century. Human data is machine DNA. It exists in the form of information streams online. ‘Big Tech’ is creating the machine technologies to generate new information. 

The indistinguishable synergy between human and machine DNA.

‘Singular’ human-machine thinking, is it inevitable.

It is not new that we have to reflect to consider the future. Many cultural movements started from an impulse to re-imagine the future. Thinking of music, as culture, as a vehicle for artistic expression of the now, for the future, with the past in mind- is to be modern. But with new ‘Big Tech’ developments progressing at inhuman speed, are we at risk of diminishing culture and human innovation?

On one side of the spectrum we have tools that assist the creative process. On the other are tools that generate the object - in terms of music, sounds, elements of songs, striving for complete music by replicating and remixing existing data. The aim - to mimic, and even precede human function. At the intersection, there will be a divide. A decision of what do we choose to let AI do, and what we as humans choose to do ourselves - this is true for both the technology musician and the listener of technology music.

With this decision comes the embracing of AI technology, without concern of distinction between AI created music and human created music. And the value we consciously place on human expression, human interaction with technology, as creativity in music. We’re already experiencing a devaluing of music culture through algorithmic playlists that distill music to moods and classifications of key words. Even if we accept the definition of mood music, for the mood of the moment. We disregard the artistic narrative in favour of convenience - making personal exploration, discovery and the cultural interaction with music optional.

Today, AI technology is trained on sound - to generate sound - by way of sound based and musical character, such as structure, chords, melody, instrumentation, tempo, key, pitch. This disregards both the artists expression through interaction with the machine instrument, and the creative act of instrument designer to create an interaction for the musician to express themself. The true idea of an intelligent machine will create by understanding the variables of creative thought, process, synthesis and performance techniques, methods and our interactions with machine instrumentsto create.

The Artist & The Technology
---
The intent of the human, as a musician, is to express sound. A primal scream, a beating of a drum. As a technology musician, the technology music artist, is to create sound with the machine instrument - through interaction of play, artistic expression.

The basic function of the technology instrument, by design, is to create sound from human interaction. If the AI machine’s function becomes to create music, how does the interaction of the musician with the machine change? Is the machine still an instrument, or a participatory AI musician if the interaction becomes a dialogue, a conversation prompt? This might sound like an abstract philosophy, but it is our reality, to understand the value we choose to assign to artistic expression with technology.

Digital, as a medium, makes ‘the physical’ accessible, beyond space and time. Preserved from natural entropy of the physical, human creative DNA in the form of replicated machine DNA, data. Pieces of content archived in cyberspace. Will the observer, the listener, the musician, place value on the narrative, the like, the comments, or the creative expression of the interaction with the electronic machine, the movement of body transcended through the electronic machine as the voice for the soul.

---

As one of our brilliant futurist minds, Bruce Sterling, puts it “The final painful paradox lies in harming what we save, as we try to save it. Preservation is it self a source of hazard... Entropy requires no maintenance. Entropy has its own poetry: it’s all about delamination, disintegration , deterioration, degeneration, decomposition, and doddering decline. But thanks to fantastic breakthroughs in modern technology, we’ve got a cure for all that: digitalization! ...It’s immaterial, so it needs no preserving; it’s escaped from the python coils of history; time harms it no more; it’s up there at the pearly gates, spotless and radiant , right next to Saint Peter. ”

